# Announcing PublicBits: Breaking down open data silos
by [Karissa McKelvey](http://karissa.github.io), [Max Ogden](http://maxogden.com)

The first thing an open data researcher must do is go to many siloed data portal websites and type in their search bar, click the right dataset, and download it somewhere on their machine. There could be many different websites that can provide relevant data, for example, a query such as ‘city water’ could force a user to go to hundreds of websites. Once the data is downloaded and integrated into an analysis, policy paper, news article, or visualization, they have to repeat the search and download process again -- oftentimes by hand -- to check if the data has been updated. This is a difficult process even for that small percentage of open data users who know how to code automated data updating systems.

We're happy to announce a new $420,000 grant from the Knight Foundation to solve this problem. Our goal is to collect all of the world’s open data sources, and make their historical data available through a search engine called [PublicBits.org](http://publicbits.org). This 'dataset of datasets' will become accessible through a free, decentralized, redundant, and open network, inspired by BitTorrent. PublicBits.org will use Dat, our flagship project, to craft a new collaborative framework that breaks down the siloed nature of data portals. Our project takes inspiration from GitHub, a popular platform that allows users to collaborate on code. We plan to bring the collaborative, historical, and reusable nature of open source to the open data movement.

Max Ogden started developing the Dat project with support from a [Knight Prototype Grant](http://knightfoundation.org/blogs/knightblog/2015/3/26/prototype-fund-winner-max-ogden-building-data-sharing-ecosystem/) in mid-2013. For the past two years, Dat has evolved with input from civic tech, journalism, and data science partners. Through these relationships, we have identified a significant pain point that spans the open data landscape centered around the discovery and distribution of data. We bring a new vision for an open data architecture that 'locks in' the openness of data, by making it findable, usable, and re-usable.

The most common data distribution strategy in use today is built on 20 year-old technology, relying on manual downloads through single points of failure such as as FTP and HTTP, resulting in messages like ‘Sorry, the server is down for maintenance.’ Our approach, inspired by BitTorrent but adapted to work for open data, is to build a smarter network that increases availability of data by connecting people who want to download open data to those who already have it. After users download data, they will be able to offer their unused bandwidth to mirror (or upload) their previously downloaded datasets as a public service. Therefore, if the original source (e.g., http://data.gov) goes offline, the data will still be downloadable. We are pursuing partnerships with cloud storage companies, academic institutions, and internet freedom organizations to ensure there will be "super-sharer" hosts available with lots of reliable storage and bandwidth.

We set out to build a 'GitHub for data' and found out that the model is drastically different than source code hosting. It is possible to centrally host code as a service because code is small, but datasets are often too large to shuttle in and out of cloud storage, both because it can be a slow process but also because it is expensive. We found that a distributed approach is ideal by affording a strong network of peers that help host public data. We plan to leverage our partnerships with academic institutions, government agencies, non-profits, and other organizations with an interest in using open data to help host these public datasets. 

It will be a challenge to find the right team and execute the plan within the allotted time for the grant. The design must also contend with a scale of data that could potentially be very large, diverse and complicated. We need to make sure users will not get overwhelmed by the amount of data, and that we can return relevant results. These challenges may not be insurmountable without the right team. Thankfully, we are already experts in the field and have built simple prototypes of the PublicBits registry and desktop application. Feel free to check out the [code on github](https://github.com/publicbits/publicbits.org). Contributions welcome!
