# Dat 1.0 release candidate


Dat 1.0 is practically ready. We've been working hard on a new API which will break backwards compatbility with dat alpha and beta. We will be closing many of the GitHub issues, since most of htem are now obsolete.

TL;DR: Get started and and break things (but don't forget to [let us know if things break](http://gitter.im/datproject/discussions)):

```
npm install -g dat
```

### Dat

Dat is a command-line tool that we have been developing as an open source project with input from scientific research partners over the last 2 years. The pilot users have so far been in the fields of astronomy, bioinformatics and neuroscience. These fields are becoming heavily data based (e.g. digital imaging from telescopes and microscopes, DNA sequencing) and tend to share their research publicly on the web. We have been in a constant cycle of R&D during this period, and have rewritten the Dat CLI four times. Each rewrite incorporates the best modules and approaches from the last iteration and presents what we hope is a more straightforward workflow. We firmly believe this iterative process is the only way we could have arrived at the conclusions that led us to the features we are currently focusing in the 1.0 release.

Dat has been redesigned with the following goals in mind:

###### 1. Ensure datasets can be accessed even if the original data source becomes unavailable

The key principle is to let anyone who has data share it with anyone requesting that data in an automated and decentralized way. This makes it possible to create many copies of data and if the original provider disappears other providers can take their place. We are pursuing partnerships with cloud storage companies, academic institutions and internet freedom organizations to ensure there will be "super-sharer" nodes available with lots of reliable storage and bandwidth. We will also be offering a registry service, which just received a [grant from the Knight Foundation](http://www.knightfoundation.org/grants/201551933/).

###### 2. Make all versions of all datasets available

One drawback of existing peer to peer file sharing tools is the ability to dynamically update a dataset or access previous versions of a dataset. Every time a dat repository is shared, Dat uses [cryptographic fingerprinting](http://github.com/maxogden/rabin) of the files to ensure others will get exactly the same data. Peers that wish to host previous versions of data may do so at the cost of more storage space.

###### 3. Fast dataset transfer speeds at reduced cost

Many times downloads are bandwidth limited, either explicitly by the server or by nature of clogged single socket connections. By downloading in parallel from many nodes in a swarm simultaneously we are able to maximize transfer speeds. Because we use rabin fingerprinting, like rsync, dat only downloads the data that changed. This drastically increases download speed and reduces bandwidth costs, especially in cases where data changes only slightly between versions.


### API

The new API is very simple. It comes with only two commands -- one for sharing data, and one for downloading data.

###### Sharing data with `dat link`

`dat link` will create a unique hash for your data, and then serve it to a BitTorrent-style peer-to-peer network. This hash is generated from the contents of your files, so if you change any files, the hash will change. In the future, we plan on creating feeds that will allow users to publish updates to old data, informing peers of newer versions, like Git.

```
$ dat link
Creating share link for 19 files, 3 folders, 13.8 MB total
Link: dat://a53d819bdf5c3496a2855df83daaac885686cac4b0bccfc580741b04898e3b32
Sharing data on port 3282, connected to 0/2 peers
```

###### Downloading data with `dat`

To download the data shared by someone else, you can simply type `dat <link>` and dat will travel over the peer to peer network, connect to the other host, and download the data directly. File metadata and contents do not travel over any centralized servers. A signalhub is used to connect peers using either DNS multicast or a BitTorrent-style DHT.

```
$ dat dat://a53d819bdf5c3496a2855df83daaac885686cac4b0bccfc580741b04898e3b32
Downloaded 1/1 files (4 MB/s, 13.8 MB total)
Download complete, sharing data. Connected to 1/2 peers
```

### Ecosystem

We have built a variety of modules that exist to support dat's wide range of use cases.

  * [hyperdrive](http://github.com/mafintosh/hyperdrive): The file sharing network dat uses to distribute files and data.

* [discovery-channel](http://github.com/maxogden/discovery-channel)
  : This is the module dat uses to find peers on the local network or the internet who are sharing the same files and data that you are.
  * [dat-app](http://github.com/karissa/dat-app): A cross-platform desktop application for managing local dats
  * [dat-explorer](http://github.com/karissa/dat-explorer): Explore a dat link in the browser.
  * [datpy](http://github.com/karissa/datpy): Python client for dat

Stay in touch with us on [Twitter](http://twitter.com/dat_project), #dat on freenode, [gitter](http://gitter.im/datproject/discussion), or subscribe to our [tiny letter](). We will let you know when new features are rolled out and when major bugs are fixed.

It's almost production ready, please help us get all the way!
